GWEN IFILL: Good evening. I'm
Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
tonight: As
the Justice Department releases
a transcript
of the Orlando shooter's 911
call, the Senate
takes up gun control, and the
Supreme Court
upholds assault weapons bans in
two states.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also ahead, a
report on the
ground in Fallujah, where Iraqi
government
forces are closing in on ISIS
militants holed
up in the key city.
GWEN IFILL: Plus, a big Trump
campaign staff
shakeup, as Democrats take a
summer lead in
polling and fund-raising. It's
Politics Monday.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And the world's
most popular
modern art museum, London's Tate
Modern, builds
upon its pioneering history with
a new 10-story
wing.
NICHOLAS SEROTA, Director, Tate
Modern: I
think that maybe we helped to
open up the
idea of what a museum could be,
that the experience
of visiting a museum should be a
learning
experience, but it should also
be a social
experience.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: The FBI today
released transcripts
of the 911 calls made by the
gunman in Orlando.
In them, Omar Mateen pledges
allegiance to
the leader of the Islamic State
group, and
says the U.S. should stop
bombing Iraq and
Syria.
Initially, this morning,
officials released
partial transcripts, without the
references
to ISIS.
RONALD HOPPER, FBI Assistant
Special Agent
in Charge: Part of the redacting
is meant
to not give credence to
individuals who have
done terrorist acts in the past.
We're not going to propagate
their rhetoric,
their violent rhetoric. And we
see no value
in putting those individuals'
names back out
there. We're trying to prevent
future acts
from happening again. And for
cowards like
this one, people like that
influence them,
so we're not going to continue
to put their
names out front.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Republicans
criticized the
decision, and, hours later, the
Justice Department
put out more complete
transcripts.
GWEN IFILL: In the presidential
campaign,
Vice President Joe Biden went
after Donald
Trump today over his calls for
action against
Muslims.
In a Washington speech, the vice
president
didn't directly name the
Republican nominee-to-be,
but his target was clear.
JOSEPH BIDEN, Vice President of
the United
States: Wielding the politics of
fear and
intolerance, like the proposal
to ban Muslims
from entering the United States,
profiling
Muslim Americans, slandering
entire religious
communities as complicit in
terrorism, calls
into question America's status
as the greatest
democracy in the history of the
world.
GWEN IFILL: Also today, Trump
fired his longtime
campaign manager, Corey
Lewandowski. The campaign
gave no reason, and Lewandowski
did not report
that he'd alienated members of
Trump's family.
Asked on CNN why he was let go,
he said, "I
don't know the answer to that."
We will dig
deeper on Politics Monday.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A searing heat
wave peaked
today in the Southwestern U.S.,
with temperatures
expected to hit 120 degrees in
some places.
The triple digits are breaking
50-year-old
records and at least two deaths
in Arizona
are blamed on the heat.
Conditions are also
making it even tougher to
control wildfires
across the region.
GWEN IFILL: There will be no
federal criminal
charges in the case of a Georgia
teenager
who suffocated inside a
rolled-up gym mat.
Kendrick Johnson died at his
Valdosta high
school in January 2013. Local
officials ruled
he got stuck trying to reach a
gym shoe. That
prompted rallies and marches,
but, today,
the Justice Department said
there's not enough
evidence to prove a crime.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The British
Parliament convened
in special session today to pay
tribute one
of its own, Jo Cox. The Labor
Party member
was shot and stabbed to death
last week in
her home district. Lawmakers
recalled Cox's
life and work, and placed two
roses, one white
for her home county of Yorkshire
and one red
for the Labor Party, at her
now-vacant seat.
RACHEL REEVES, Labor Party M.P.:
Jo was struck
down much too soon, so it now
falls on all
of our shoulders, the woman I
met in the coffee
shop in Batley, Jo's friends,
M.P.s, all of
us, to carry on Jo's work, to
combat and guard
against hatred, intolerance, and
injustice,
to serve others with dignity and
with love.
And that is the best way that we
can remember
Jo and all that she stood for.
JUDY WOODRUFF: After a three-day
halt, campaigning
resumed today on whether Britain
should stay
in the European Union. The
referendum will
be held Thursday.
GWEN IFILL: Wall Street surged
today, on optimism
that Britain will vote to stay
in the E.U.
The Dow Jones industrial average
gained 129
points to close near 17805. The
Nasdaq rose
almost 37 points, and the S&P
500 added 12.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A record 65
million people
were forced from their homes
worldwide last
year, largely by war. That's
roughly equal
to the entire population of
Great Britain.
The U.N.'s refugee agency
reports more than
half were fleeing conflicts in
Syria, Afghanistan
and Somalia. And while millions
escaped to
other nations, many more are on
the run within
their own countries.
GWEN IFILL: Iran says it has
broken up one
of the largest terror plots ever
on its soil.
State TV today reported police
arrested several
suspects and seized bombs and
ammunition.
It suggested the Islamic State
or other Sunni
militants may be to blame. Iran
is supporting
the fight against ISIS in Iraq
and Syria.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And China leads
the world in
supercomputers for the seventh
year in a row.
An annual ranking out today also
finds that,
for the first time, China has
more machines
than the U.S. on the list. One
is five times
faster than the fastest U.S.
supercomputer.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
the gun debate
continues in Congress and in
court; a humanitarian
crisis unveiled as Iraqi forces
retake Fallujah;
a major shakeup in the Donald
Trump campaign;
and much more.
GWEN IFILL: In the wake of the
deadly Orlando
nightclub shooting, the debate
over gun violence
faced a series of votes on
Capitol Hill.
Lisa Desjardins reports.
LISA DESJARDINS: From
courtrooms, to Congress,
the often theoretical debate
over guns touched
ground today, eight days after
the massacre
in Orlando.
In Washington, a showdown on the
Senate floor
over four different gun control
measures,
from background checks to
banning sales to
those on the no-fly list. It was
a classic
partisan duel.
SEN. HARRY REID (D-NV), MINORITY
LEADER: Republicans
say hey, look, we tried. And all
the time,
they're cheerleaders for bosses
at the NRA.
SEN. JOHN CORNYN (R), Texas: Our
colleagues
want to make this about gun
control. My colleagues
many ways want to fight the
symptoms without
fighting the disease.
LISA DESJARDINS: Lots of debate,
but no expected
changes, when all was said and
done.
Across the street, Supreme Court
justices
decided not to hear an appeal of
semiautomatic
weapons bans in Connecticut and
New York.
That means the bans stay in
place. They were
enacted after the school
shooting in 2012,
at Newtown, Connecticut.
Families of the Newtown victims
were also
watching this courtroom in
Bridgeport, where
a state judge heard arguments
about whether
they can sue a gun manufacturer.
James Vogts
represents Remington Arms, which
made the
semiautomatic rifle used in the
Newtown shooting.
JAMES VOGTS, Remington Arms:
It's really not
the role of this court, or
perhaps a jury,
to decide whether civilians, as
a class, broad
class of people, are not
appropriate to own
these class of firearms.
LISA DESJARDINS: Joshua Koskoff
represents
the families who are suing.
JOSHUA KOSKOFF, Attorney For
Plaintiffs: It
was an AR-15 rifle, a weapon,
Judge, that
was designed to be used in
combat by our military
to assault and kill enemies of
war. It was
Remington's choice to entrust
the most notorious
American military killing
machine to the public.
LISA DESJARDINS: Recent polls
show Americans
generally support gun
restrictions. In a Reuters/Ipsos
survey last week, about 71
percent approved
of strong or moderate gun
restrictions, while
about 16 percent want basic
limits and just
6 percent said firearms should
have no or
few restrictions.
But, as debate continues, so
does the violence.
In Chicago yesterday, police
reported something
rare, an apparent gang-related
shooting using
not a handgun, but a
semiautomatic assault
rifle.
WOMAN: When does it stop? What's
going to
-- how do we get help with this?
What do we
do?
LISA DESJARDINS: The Chicago
victim was 17
years old.
GWEN IFILL: For more on the
recurring debate
over gun laws and gun ownership,
we turn now
to Marcia Coyle, "NewsHour"
regular and chief
Washington correspondent for
"The National
Law Journal," Evan Osnos, whose
extensive
report on concealed-carry laws
appears in
this week's "New Yorker"
magazine, and, as
you just heard, "NewsHour"
correspondent Lisa
Desjardins, who's been following
the action
on Capitol Hill.
As of now, this time 6:00 p.m.
Eastern time
tonight, do we have any -- is
there any possibility
that any of the four gun bills
that were up
for a vote today might pass?
LISA DESJARDINS: Realistically,
no. And we
already know that one has
failed, something
that seems innocuous, increasing
funding for
background checks on the federal
level. That
has not received 60 votes.
It was Republican amendment.
That didn't clear.
We do not expect the other three
to clear
there that 60-vote bar either.
GWEN IFILL: In spite of what we
just saw in
terms of public opinion?
LISA DESJARDINS: That's right.
And when you look at public
opinion here,
there's a real disconnect. You
see overwhelmingly,
not just Americans as a whole,
Gwen, supporting
things like background checks,
some moderate
restrictions, you could say, but
Republicans
as a group.
Recently, Pew and many other
groups have polled
Republicans and they find
80-some percent
sometimes support background
checks, but yet
Republicans on Capitol Hill are
going the
exact opposite directions.
GWEN IFILL: Today at the Supreme
Court, Marcia,
we saw that the court decided
not to take
up a challenge to two assault
weapons bans
in New York and Connecticut.
Now, we know that when the court
doesn't do
something, that doesn't
necessarily mean a
lot. But there's a record here.
There's a
pattern.
MARCIA COYLE, "The National Law
Journal":
Well there is, the court not
wanting to get
back into this Second Amendment
arena.
The court's had a number of
petitions come
before them in recent years.
Even this year,
there was another assault
weapon-type ban
out of Highland Park, Illinois.
The challenge
came there to the Supreme Court
and the Supreme
Court didn't want to take it
up. It's not unusual for the
court to allow
certain questions to percolate
in the lower
courts after it's made a major
ruling. And
the major ruling, though, here
came in 2008
in the so-called Heller decision
involving
the District of Columbia's
handgun ban.
But they're just -- you need
four votes to
take a case in the Supreme
Court, and they
just aren't there, despite some
rather strong
dissents from the denial of a
review by Justices
Clarence Thomas, Samuel Alito,
and the late
Antonin Scalia.
GWEN IFILL: And those dissents
are about the
right to gun ownership, or what
are they?
MARCIA COYLE: They're really
about how the
lower courts have been dealing
with applying
that 2008 landmark decision.
Those three justices have said
at various
times that they feel the lower
courts aren't
giving the right recognized by
the Second
Amendment the due that it should
have, and
that they are all over the map
in how they
examine restrictions on guns.
And it's time,
they feel, for the court to step
back into
this area.
GWEN IFILL: OK, Evan, let's take
a step from
these two branches of government
and talk
more specifically about the
business branch
of government, as it were.
There is a business incentive
which has very
little to do with the laws about
why guns
continue to be sold.
EVAN OSNOS, "The New Yorker":
Well, this is
the thing I think that is sort
of a paradox,
is at this very moment when we
look at the
effects that guns has had on the
country in
the last two weeks, the gun
business is actually
doing better than ever.
Smith & Wesson, the largest U.S.
gun manufacturer,
their stock price increased 10
percent by
the time the market opened the
day after Orlando.
What's going on? The answer is
that the industry
occupies a very unique place in
American culture.
It's almost insulated from
business pressures
because of a law that was passed
in Congress
in 2005, meaning that if
somebody wanted to
bring a lawsuit, they couldn't
do it now.
It's very hard to do it. One of
the things
we heard in the segment was
about this lawsuit
in Connecticut, and that lawsuit
is enormously
important, because what it's
going to try
to do is to figure out if the
gun industry
today, which has basically been
able to profit
in the period in which mass
shootings have
elevated the fear, have elevated
people's
desire to own a gun for
self-defense, whether
in fact the kinds of civil cases
that have
in the past have shaped
industry's behavior,
whether we're talking about BP,
for instance,
with oil, or whether we're
talking about tobacco
and how they market, whether in
fact they
will be shaped by their role in
these kinds
of national tragedies.
GWEN IFILL: Lisa, just as we
have been talking,
a second effort at gun control
in the Senate
this afternoon has failed. Now,
here is my
question about that, though.
As Evan just said, there's a
distinct difference
between an argument about gun
control and
self-defense. Self-defense seems
like something
everybody can get behind. Is
that the argument
that is playing out on the floor
of the Senate
or is it something more arcane?
LISA DESJARDINS: It's both.
The biggest argument to pay
attention to I
think for the endgame right now
is the argument
about the no-fly or terror watch
list. And
I say this because, while
today's votes, we
do not expect to be meaningful,
there is a
compromise effort under way led
by Susan Collins
of Maine just trying to pass
something.
And we have seen even Donald
Trump express
interest in somehow preventing
more people
on the no-fly list from being
able to get
guns.
GWEN IFILL: That's something we
have heard
the president talk about too.
LISA DESJARDINS: That's right.
And the president, Democrats,
they all talk
sort of similar. But the
difference there
in is in the specifics. And it's
about Republicans'
mistrust of government having a
list of Americans
that it can block from having a
gun.
The list is not public, you
don't know when
you're on the list, and
Republicans say that's
a problem. Now, they err on the
side of let's
not -- let's err on the side of
allowing more
people the ability to buy guns.
Democrats
say no. Let's err on the side of
preventing
people who we think are
dangerous from having
guns. That's what they're
working out right
now.
GWEN IFILL: So, at the Supreme
Court or in
the courts in general, is there
a long line
of gun debates headed for the
high court or
does it pretty much stop at
appeals courts?
Does it pretty much stop farther
down the
line, so the court waits for
conflict?
MARCIA COYLE: The court will
wait for a conflict.
And they may get one involving
Maryland's
ban on assault weapons. That
right now is
in the Fourth Circuit Court of
Appeals and
was argued in May, so a decision
could come
any day. But there's another
factor too, Gwen,
that I think comes into play
here. And that
is, the New York case that the
Supreme Court
didn't take today wasn't the
major challenge.
The federal appellate court that
ruled in
the Connecticut case also had
the New York
-- another New York challenge at
the same
time and uphold New York's ban
back in October.
In March, the largest gun rights
group in
New York decided not to go to
the Supreme
Court on the advice of their
lawyers, for
two reasons. One, Justice Scalia
was no longer
on the bench, the champion of
the Second Amendment
individual right.
And, two, we now have an
eight-justice court
and the possibility of a 4-4
split would mean
that the lower court's opinion
upholding both
bans would stand in place. And
they didn't
want that precedent set.
GWEN IFILL: Fascinating.
Evan, in your piece in "The New
Yorker," you
talk about concealed-carry laws,
which, among
other things, has driven up the
number of
guns that have been sold, as has
multiple
gun ownership. One person can
buy, can own
eight guns. And that's happening
more and
more.
EVAN OSNOS: Right.
This is the thing we don't often
talk about,
which is that the biggest change
that's gone
on in the culture of guns and
the business
of guns over the last generation
is that you
can now legally carry them in
all kinds of
places you simply couldn't
before.
Two decades ago, you simply
couldn't leave
your house in many states, 22
states. It was
either illegal or restricted
regulated to
go outside with a gun. It's now
legal in all
50 states. And this is really
the beginning,
I think, not the end, of a kind
of national
political conversation about
whether or not
we are ready for that, whether
or not people
accept that and where they
accept that.
One of the reasons I think why
the court has
been reluctant to weigh in to
what everybody
agrees is probably the next
great frontier
in Second Amendment law, which
is where can
you carry and why, is because
you see these
radical differences in place to
place.
And so far, what has happened is
that the
courts have basically said we're
going to
leave it to these local
governments, state
governments and lower
governments to decide
who can carry a gun and why.
GWEN IFILL: Lisa, final thought?
LISA DESJARDINS: And I think
here's why we
see the difference in politics
between the
American landscape. We see, as a
percentage,
fewer gun owners, but they are
owning more
guns. Just like we see in so
many issues,
it's becoming concentrated in
very vocal minorities,
but they're controlling the
debate.
Lisa Desjardins, Evan Osnos at
"The New Yorker"
and Marcia Coyle of "The
National Law Journal,"
thank you all very much.
MARCIA COYLE: Pleasure.
EVAN OSNOS: Thanks, Gwen.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now we turn to
Iraq.
The offensive to retake the city
of Fallujah,
held by ISIS for more than two
years, is proceeding
much more quickly than
anticipated. But tens
of thousands of its residents
have been forced
by the fighting into the desert,
as temperatures
soar, without services, or even
water in many
cases.
We turn to special correspondent
Jane Arraf.
She's in Baghdad now, where she
is on assignment
for The Christian Science
Monitor.
Jane, you were just in Fallujah
yesterday.
And is it the case this
operation has been
going much faster than expected?
JANE ARRAF: Well, Judy, it has
been going
faster certainly than some of
the previous
operations, including the battle
for the provincial
capital Anbar.
But I think we have to remember
that Fallujah
is a different case. Fallujah
had up to 100,000
people in it. And it was where
ISIS first
came into, where they tried to
persuade Iraqis
that they were a better
alternative than the
Iraqi government.
They didn't lay the land mines,
they didn't
lay the improvised explosives
the same way
that they riddled other cities
with. It was
actually faster for the special
forces that
we were with to actually go
through there
and fight.
Having said that, they have not
in fact liberated
Fallujah, in the sense that the
Iraqi government
likes to say that they have.
Now, Iraqi special
forces, including the commander,
who we spoke
with, says that they have now
cleared 75 percent
of the city.
American military sources say
they think that's
closer to 25 percent. And they
say that the
effort is continuing. But as
it's continuing,
as you pointed out, there is
absolute tragedy
on the outskirts of Fallujah
with all these
civilians trying to flea.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, tell us
about that. Who
stayed in Fallujah when ISIS had
control,
and what's happening to those
people?
JANE ARRAF: A lot of people did
leave at the
beginning, but then a lot of
people stayed
for a variety of reasons.
And when it got to two years in,
essentially,
they weren't allowed to leave.
So, the people
that I was speaking with, mostly
women and
children, because they were
separated from
their husbands and their
brothers as the Iraqi
security forces tried to weed
out suspected
ISIS fighters from civilians
fleeing, were
telling us, were telling me that
they had
been without real food for weeks
on end.
Now, as the siege of Fallujah
intensified,
ISIS itself started running out
of food, and
it started giving food only to
those tribes,
those families that were loyal
to it. So,
groups of women who I spoke with
said that
they had been living on the only
thing they
could afford, which was
basically dried dates
that were meant for animal feed.
They weren't allowed to leave
the city. If
they could leave the city, it
was through
bribery. And at this point,
people just don't
have the money. So, they
basically stayed,
Judy, because they had to stay.
It is when
ISIS was driven back and the
floodgates opened
and up to 80,000 people fled
over the past
three days, just last week, that
things got
really dire.
Some people were actually killed
trying to
leave. I met a man with the
remainder of his
family in an ambulance in
Fallujah being evacuated
by Iraqi security forces who has
lost three
of his daughters and his wife.
As they were
leaving, they were hit by either
a mortar
or a rocket.
He ended up burying two of his
daughters in
the grounds in the hospital. And
then he couldn't
leave until Iraqi security
forces rescued
him. There are other people who
drowned trying
to leave.
But even those who survive,
Judy, are living
in dire circumstances. There is
no water.
There is no consistent water
supply. There
is not even shelter. I have met
pregnant women
who are lying on the ground
without even a
piece of shade.
And it's doubly puzzling,
because this was
expected, this exodus of
civilians from Fallujah.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You're saying a
lot of people
are still there, but there's
just been little
or no provisions made for those
who have been
able to get out?
JANE ARRAF: There are very
people believed
left in the city.
Now, if you talk to aid
organizations, and
there are very few of them on
ground, that
is the other problem, they will
tell you that
up to 80,000 people actually
fled over three
days.
So, all of those people are in
areas surrounding
Fallujah. And it in places that
aren't really
equipped to hold large numbers
of people.
The other problem is that they
are essentially
trapped between Fallujah and the
fighting
that is still going on there.
And on this side, Baghdad.
Baghdad will not
let them in, because it believes
that many
of them are ISIS supporters and
it isn't able
to screen them.
So, the most poignant scenes are
just across
a bridge that leads from the
outskirts of
Baghdad to Anbar province. There
are thousands
of people, most of them women
and children,
massed up against that bridge
waiting for
approval to cross. They're out
there in temperatures
that are more than 100 degrees
in the shade.
They're scrambling for even a
little bit of
water. There are no toilets.
There are no
tents. And it is a sign really
that the international
community as well as the Iraqi
government
has failed them. Everyone is
scrambling to
get aid in there, but at this
point there
are people suffering, and
reports coming out
that some people may actually be
dying.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It sounds just
horrible.
Jane Arraf reporting for us
right now in Baghdad
-- yesterday, you were in
Fallujah -- thank
you.
JANE ARRAF: Thank you, Judy.
GWEN IFILL: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
hard times for
the coal industry and its
employees; Cleveland
celebrates its first big sports
championship
in decades; and an inside look
at a major
addition to the world's most
popular museum
of modern art.
GWEN IFILL: But, first, we turn
to today's
campaign news, and what the
summer solstice
shakeup at the Trump campaign
reveals about
the candidate's strategy as he
heads into
the general election, while at
the same time,
Hillary Clinton launches a
pre-convention
spending spree.
It's Politics Monday, and we
turn, as always,
to Tamara Keith of NPR and Amy
Walter of The
Cook Political Report, who joins
us tonight
from Pittsburgh.
Tam, we know that Corey
Lewandowski, as Trump's
longtime right-hand man, who he
fiercely defended
over cases that -- questions
that he roughed
up reporters, that he didn't
tell the truth,
that he had continual fights
with other members
of the campaign, today, he's
out. What happened?
TAMARA KEITH, National Public
Radio: Well,
it depends on who you ask.
Depending on which Trump
campaign source you
ask -- and my colleagues at NPR
have been
asking many of them -- he was
either ousted,
fired or it was a mutually
agreed parting
of the ways.
It seems quite clear that he was
in fact fired,
that the internal conflict, he
came out on
the wrong side of the internal
conflict. And
the reality is, the Trump
campaign is in a
really weird place. He has been
the presumptive
nominee essentially for six
weeks, and he
hasn't really used that time and
his campaign
hasn't used that time to gain
any sort of
an advantage.
GWEN IFILL: Amy, our friend Dana
Bash at CNN
interviewed Lewandowski at
length today, and
he said there was absolutely
nothing wrong,
in fact, that when Donald Trump
called him
and said the words you're fired,
which reminds
us all of a certain reality
television show,
he thought that was fine.
How unusual is it to have
shakeups like this,
and in big campaigns at this
stage?
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: That's
an excellent question.
And so I went back and looked.
And so many
campaigns have had shakeups. The
most recent,
of course, in memory was the
John McCain shakeup.
He shook his campaign up both
before the primary
and then over the summer of the
election year.
We have had -- I sent there and
looked. John
Kerry had a campaign shakeup.
Hillary Clinton
had a campaign shakeup. John
Kerry, as I said,
had a campaign shakeup. There's
one thing
that all of them -- Al Gore as
well.
There's one thing all of them
have one in
common. None of them won the
election for
president. None were elected
president of
the United States. Look, there
are two reasons
to go through a campaign
shakeup. Either,
one, you need to assure your
donors or activists
or insiders that things are
changing, because
they don't like the direction
that things
are going, or, two, there's
actual -- something
going on in the campaign where
different advisers
and the candidate have different
opinions
about where the campaign is
going to go.
The challenge it seems to me for
Donald Trump
and the Trump campaign is, it's
not so much
about strategy. It is the fact
that the candidate
himself doesn't seem to be able
to control
himself. Donald Trump can't fire
himself.
And Donald Trump is the campaign
manager and
the ad person and the pollster
and the policy
director.
And he is running this campaign.
And unless
or until he starts listening to
people who
are telling him to run a better,
more focused,
more disciplined campaign, I
don't think any
of this is going to matter.
GWEN IFILL: Let's talk about the
conventional
measures we keep applying to
this campaign,
which isn't unreasonable, except
that he keeps
winning by unconventional
measures, and he
says that's how I'm going to win
the general
election.
Let's talk about money. We
talked about donors
being a little freaked out.
Donald Trump is
actually going places, and doing
fund-raisers,
and trying to raise money, he
says, for the
party.
But take a look at what he needs
to raise.
We have compared here what
Hillary Clinton
is apparently going to be
spending in the
next several months, or already
has started
spending in key states, key
states that she
needs to win in the fall, $23
million on ads.
This is June. Let's compare to
how much Donald
Trump is spending.
Nothing, absolutely nothing.
Now, in Hillary
Clinton's case, we're talking
about super
PACs, as well as her own
campaign money. But
how do you not spend any money
on ads?
TAMARA KEITH: It seems that it
would be a
challenge.
Donald Trump's theory here is
that he can
do like he did in the primary,
dominate free
media. Cable will run his stump
speeches live
and he will just keep on having
big crowds
and keep on winning.
It's an interesting theory, but
it's not really
clear how well that's going to
hold up. In
2012, Mitt Romney ran ads in
June. He didn't
run nearly as much. He didn't
spend nearly
as President Obama and his
allies spent. He
was vastly outspent in June.
And, as a result, the Obama
campaign and his
allies were really able to lock
in a narrative
that Mitt Romney was never able
to shake.
Well, Donald Trump has
essentially ceded the
airwaves for this month.
Meanwhile, Hillary
Clinton's allies, Priorities
USA, her super
PAC, has already booked more
than $100 million
in ad buys through November in
eight key states.
GWEN IFILL: Wow.
OK. So, Amy, let's talk about
how one does
that. Another conventional
measure is having
people who agree with you.
AMY WALTER: Yes.
GWEN IFILL: So I saw a story in
The Texas
Tribune this weekend that Donald
Trump goes
to Texas to raise money and the
guy who introduces
him at the event, the Texas
banker, starts
to disagree with him on NAFTA,
starts to disagree
with him on immigration, and
this is a guy
writing a check to the campaign.
AMY WALTER: Right.
GWEN IFILL: Now, compare that
with Hillary
Clinton. Today, we saw Joe Biden
come out
and speak and attack Trump on
her behalf.
We have seen Elizabeth Warren.
For a change, it's the Democrats
who appear
to be in lockstep and the
Republicans who
are not.
AMY WALTER: Right.
This idea about a unity party
has eluded Donald
Trump now for weeks. As Tam
pointed out, he
has had six weeks as the
presumptive nominee.
And every week, the story has
been about something
dysfunctional going on either
with Donald
Trump or the Donald Trump
campaign.
The other thing I want to point
out about
this map that I think is really
interesting,
where both Hillary Clinton and
the super PAC
supporting her are spending
their money, they
are all in swing states, yes,
indeed, but
these are offensive. This is an
offensive
strategy, rather than a
defensive strategy.
She is not playing and the
outside group is
not playing ads in this state,
Pennsylvania,
which has long gone Democratic,
but a lot
of people see as the kind of
place where Donald
Trump can break through, or
Wisconsin, another
Rust Belt state, and of course
Michigan, another
state that Donald Trump says he
is going to
be able to compete in with his
appeal to white
working-class voters.
The fact that the campaign and
the super PAC
are not playing in those states
suggests to
me that they feel more confident
in their
defense and now they get to play
all offense
all the time. Remember, if
Hillary Clinton
holds every single state that
John Kerry carried,
plus Florida and New Mexico,
it's over. She
doesn't need to win any of those
other states
that are in that map.
GWEN IFILL: I have one more
question for both
of you. We only have a minute,
less than a
minute left.
But there has been talk of a
delegate insurgency
in the Republican Party, people
who are going
to find a way to stop Trump at
the convention.
Amy?
AMY WALTER: I'm beyond skeptical
that this
is going to happen. We have
heard this for
a long time.
If I have learned anything from
this primary,
it's that the insiders are not
driving this
train. It's the grassroots. This
would go
over very badly with the
grassroots, with
the base, number one. Number
two, there is
no other candidate. I don't see
that there's
an alternative.
And, most important, do you
think that if
Trump gets ousted in a coup at
the convention,
he is just going to go quietly
away and make
things easy for the Republicans?
He's going
to be back on Twitter and back
on cable making
life miserable for them.
GWEN IFILL: Tam?
TAMARA KEITH: What Amy said.
(LAUGHTER)
GWEN IFILL: She said it so well.
TAMARA KEITH: I feel like this
bubble floats
up every four or five days, and
then it bursts
and comes back down, and then we
do it all
over again.
GWEN IFILL: OK, big party in
Cleveland last
night. Maybe we will have
another upheaval
in Cleveland this fall, this
summer.
Tamara Keith of NPR, Amy Walker
of The Cook
Political Report, thank you, as
always.
TAMARA KEITH: You're welcome.
AMY WALTER: You're welcome.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Hard times are
hitting the
energy sector in America's West.
Oil and gas
production are down, and in
Wyoming's coal
industry, three of the state's
four largest
producers are now in bankruptcy,
leading to
hundreds of layoffs.
From Public Media's Inside
Energy, Leigh Paterson
reports from Gillette, Wyoming,
on how the
state's energy booms and busts
are affecting
almost everyone.
LEIGH PATERSON: Gail Japp's
horses have helped
her through hard times, like
when she was
getting divorced.
GAIL JAPP, Former Peabody Energy
Employee:
When you have had a bad day, you
just come
out and they just make life
worth going on.
LEIGH PATERSON: Especially this
one, named
Money.
GAIL JAPP: He's very trusting
and he's very
loving.
LEIGH PATERSON: Recently, things
have been
tough again. Japp was one of the
nearly 500
Wyoming coal miners laid off
recently. And
to pay her mortgage, she will
have to sell
a lot of her things, including
her beloved
horses.
GAIL JAPP: So, I have no choice.
I just -- I
have got to downsize. And
there's a lot of
stuff I'm going to have to sell.
LEIGH PATERSON: Japp worked for
Peabody Energy
for over a decade, mostly
massive haul trucks.
After cutting jobs, including
hers, in March,
the coal giant declared
bankruptcy in April.
GAIL JAPP: Those were so fun.
Them things
were just awesome.
LEIGH PATERSON: She misses it,
and is worried
about getting a new job.
GAIL JAPP: Yes, I can't leave
Gillette, which
is really going to make it hard
for me to
find something, because my dad
is 90 years
old, and then I got two
grandkids here in
town that try to stay with me as
much as they
can. So it's just -- I don't
know. It's been
devastating.
LEIGH PATERSON: That's because
prices for
coal, oil, and gas are all way
down, all at
the same time. Revenue from
those industries
accounts for around 70 percent
of the state's
budget.
Fossil fuels employ around 10
percent of Wyoming's
private sector work force, so,
an energy bust
hits towns like Gillette
particularly hard,
because this region is rich in
all three,
coal, oil, and gas. Gillette
even calls itself
the energy capital of the
nation.
But over the past year,
unemployment claims
in the county have more than
doubled. Businesses
are closing, homes are up for
sale, rail traffic
is way down, and people all of
the sudden
are in need of basics like food.
A line formed at this church-run
food bank
before the doors even opened.
WOMAN: Oh, well, this should
help out a little
bit.
WOMAN: Yes.
LEIGH PATERSON: Volunteers
served 110 families
that day.
Dennis Rehder is the pastor at
Project I:61
Ministries. After the layoffs at
the coal
mines, Rehder has been expecting
to see those
workers at the food bank. But he
says they
have actually been serving a lot
of people
in other industries, such as oil
field workers
and hotel employees who have
already been
out of work for months.
DENNIS REHDER, Project I:61
Ministries: What
that does, it creates us to be
aware that,
in three months from today,
those people that
are living off savings or they
have exhausted
all their means of financial
help or other
community things, now they
really, really
need it. So it's kind of like
we're a last
resort.
LEIGH PATERSON: People all over
the region
are looking ahead to try and
figure out what's
next, like many at this meeting
put on by
a coal advocacy group called
Friends of Coal.
JONATHAN DOWNING, Executive
Director, Wyoming
Mining Association: I believe in
our great
state. And I know that, if
anybody can come
through this, its going to be
coal miners.
LEIGH PATERSON: But that won't
be easy. For
decades, Gillette has had a
strong economy
and a low unemployment rate,
fueled by energy
dollars and plentiful,
well-paying jobs.
The average coal miner in
Wyoming makes around
$83,000 a year. The average
American worker
makes just over half that.
Stacey Moeller has been mining
since her 20s.
She says, for her, it's more
than just a job.
STACEY MOELLER, Coal Miner: You
know, you
work at something for a long
time, and it
becomes such a part of you.
LEIGH PATERSON: Losing that
identity is scary.
And Moeller isn't sure anything
could replace
coal mining in Gillette.
STACEY MOELLER: At this time,
you just can't.
There just isn't anything for
them to go to
that's comparable. What would it
be? And how
do we start that? And how do we
get there?
I don't know.
LEIGH PATERSON: Everywhere you
go in Gillette,
people are thinking about these
kinds of questions,
like Valerie Debeau and Barbi
Hays, the manager
and owner of a local BAR.
VALERIE DEBEAU, Jake's Tavern:
Jake's Tavern
is the working man's bar.
BARBI HAYS, Jake's Tavern: Its
like a neighborhood
bar.
VALERIE DEBEAU: It's a
neighborhood.
BARBI HAYS: It's like a Cheers,
yes.
LEIGH PATERSON: Recently, they
have cut back
on hours and stopped offering
insurance to
their employees.
VALERIE DEBEAU: We don't want to
have to lay
off anybody. So we just continue
on.
BARBI HAYS: Try to cut our
costs.
VALERIE DEBEAU: As much as we
can.
LEIGH PATERSON: Debeau and Hays
have seen
slowdowns before, having lived
in Gillette
for almost 40 years. So when I
asked what
they're hoping for, they went
back to what's
always happened.
BARBI HAYS: Another boom. We
want that boom.
VALERIE DEBEAU: Yes. Yes.
LEIGH PATERSON: But another coal
boom is unlikely
anytime soon. Coal production
this year is
expected to drop 16 percent,
which could mean
more trouble for towns like
Gillette all across
the country.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm
Leigh Paterson
in Gillette, Wyoming.
GWEN IFILL: It took more than 50
years of
sports misery, in baseball,
football and basketball,
for the city of Cleveland last
night to finally
break what even loyal fans had
come to believe
was a curse.
But LeBron James and the
Cavaliers emerged
through last night, making
history with the
greatest NBA championship series
comeback
ever.
John Yang has more.
MAN: It's over! It's over!
Cleveland is a
city of champions once again!
The Cavaliers
are NBA champions!
JOHN YANG: Game seven of the NBA
Finals between
the Cleveland Cavaliers and the
Golden State
Warriors was a tense affair from
start to
finish. Golden State led by as
much as eight
points.
But in the second half, LeBron
James and guard
Kyrie Irving made huge plays on
both ends
of the floor. And Cleveland
knocked off Golden
State, which had set a regular
season record
for the most wins.
For James, whose jersey was
burned by fans
just six years ago when he left
for Miami,
his performance delivered on a
promise he
made upon his return.
LEBRON JAMES, Cleveland
Cavaliers: I poured
my heart, my blood, my sweat, my
tears for
this game. And I'm home. This is
what I came
back for. This is unbelievable.
It doesn't
feel real right now.
JOHN YANG: A large span of
cheering crowds
turned out at the airport today
to welcome
the team home, a moment for Ohio
fans to savor.
And now we some perspective on
all of this
from Greg Swartz. Greg Swartz
writes about
the Cleveland Cavaliers for The
Bleacher Report.
He joins us from Toledo, Ohio.
And Kevin Blackistone
is a sports writer for The
Washington Post.
He's also a regular contributor
at ESPN and
teaches sports journalism at the
University
of Maryland.
Greg, Kevin, thank you both for
joining us.
Greg, let me start with you with
may be a
simple question, but how big a
deal is this
in Cleveland?
GREG SWARTZ, Bleacher Report: I
think this
is a bigger deal than anybody
could have imagined.
You look at our history as a
sports community,
everybody knows it's been 52
years, but really,
for the Cavaliers, 46 seasons.
They have own
been to the NBA Finals -- this
is now the
third time, obviously the first
time that
they have won it.
This is a big deal not just for
Cleveland,
but for Akron, for Northeast
Ohio, for all
of Ohio just to finally, finally
say, hey,
we got one, we're champions. It
is something
that hasn't been done in a very
long time,
and it's a tremendous feeling
right now in
Northern Ohio.
JOHN YANG: Kevin, you have been
watching sports
and writing about sports for a
long time.
KEVIN BLACKISTONE, University of
Maryland:
Yes.
JOHN YANG: How many droughts are
there like
this? Compare this to previous
droughts? And
what droughts are left for big
sports cities?
KEVIN BLACKISTONE: Well,
obviously, you have
the Chicago Cubs. That's
probably the longest
drought going. The Boston Red
Sox got over
their drought at the turn of the
millennium.
Even if you didn't have the
entire history
of Cleveland, just what LeBron
James was able
to do transform the Cleveland
Cavaliers franchise
into a championship team, what
he's done there
just in the past two years since
arriving
is amazing in and of itself.
So, this is a huge deal, not
just in Cleveland,
but nationally. This is an
amazing sports
story.
JOHN YANG: Greg, Kevin just
talked about the
LeBron James departure and then
the return.
Six years ago, he was the most
hated man in
Cleveland, I would imagine. Can
you have imagined
back then this happening now?
GREG SWARTZ: No, no. I will
remember that
night forever in 2010, when he
made his decision.
That was -- man, that was your
girlfriend
breaking up with you. That was
somebody stealing
your dog. That was every, like,
bad thing
that could happen to you, your
heart being
ripped out. And at that time,
nobody could
have thought he was going to
come back, just
four years later, still in his
prime, and
really did deliver a
championship here in
year two.
I think it's just phenomenal,
because you
look at it, his last two years
in Cleveland,
they won 66 and 60 games. The
four years that
he was gone, they had the worst
record in
the entire NBA. And now the two
years that
he's back, two finals trips, one
championship.
And you can make the argument
he's still arguably
playing the best basketball of
his career
after that finals performance.
So you're not
only happy about the present,
but you look
at the next couple of years, and
they look
pretty good as well.
JOHN YANG: Well, Kevin, let's
look at that.
Two years since he's back, he
takes them to
the title.
KEVIN BLACKISTONE: Right.
JOHN YANG: Takes them to the
championship
series twice, takes them to the
title.
Where does this put LeBron James
now in the
game of basketball against
Michael Jordan,
against all the others?
KEVIN BLACKISTONE: Sure.
Well, Magic Johnson tweeted out
last night
that it puts him in the category
of the top
five players all time in the
NBA. And I would
say that is absolutely the case.
Let's forget
about the fact that he led in
every category
in this finals, points,
rebounds, assists,
steals, blocked shots, of all
the players
that were playing.
And let's forget that two games
he scored
82 points games combined to
force this game
seven. But let's just look at
the fact that
he carried a rookie head coach
in Tyronn Lue
to this championship.
A year ago, he took David Blatt,
another rookie
NBA head coach, to this
championship. When
he was with Miami, he won
championships with
Erik Spoelstra as a head coach,
who, when
he got there, had just been a
head coach for
a couple of years in this league
and was vastly
unknown.
And when he was originally in
Cleveland, most
of the time, he was there, he
had Mike Brown,
who, when Mike Brown arrived
there, was a
rookie head coach in the NBA.
That's just
how dynamic it is a talent it is
that you
have in LeBron James, not only
as a player,
but also as a leader.
And you're talking about someone
who has developed
these leadership skills despite
his upbringing,
coming up in a single-parent
household, as
everyone knows the story,
socioeconomic problems,
shoving them here and there in
Akron where
he grew up. And he's such a
mature individual,
one of the most mature,
well-spoken, smartly
spoken athletes that we have in
pro sports
today.
JOHN YANG: And, Greg, you say
it's not just
Cleveland. It's the whole
region. Talk about
the region's attachment. And his
high school
games in Akron would be on ESPN.
GREG SWARTZ: He is fully
immersed in the region.
I attended the University of
Akron. He was
on campus all the time in the
summer. I would
go to the rec center. He would
be working
out with his trainer. I would go
past the
James A. Rhodes Arena, he would
be in there
playing pickup basketball with
Chris Paul.
He would be sitting there
talking to some
of his buddies. And you just
would walk by
him on your way to class. He
doesn't just
talk about Akron and Cleveland
and profess
his love in words. He's there,
he's involved,
he's hands-on. He still lives
just right outside
of Akron. He still loves the
community very,
very much.
JOHN YANG: Greg Swartz and Kevin
Blackistone,
thanks for being with us.
KEVIN BLACKISTONE: Thank you,
John.
GREG SWARTZ: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally tonight:
a room with
a view, a very large view of
modern art. And
it just got even bigger.
Jeffrey Brown has our report
from London.
NARRATOR: Then Her Majesty saw
the adjoining
Bankside Power Station, which
supplies the
city and a large area of North
London.
JEFFREY BROWN: London, 1962,
Queen Elizabeth
II visits the Bankside Power
Station on the
south bank of the River Thames.
Fifty-four years later, the
queen just celebrated
her 90th birthday. And the
former power station,
now better known as Tate Modern,
is celebrating
its remarkable transformation
into the world's
most visited modern art museum,
with the opening
of a new 10-story extension.
London Mayor Sadiq Khan spoke at
the press
conference.
SADIQ KHAN, Mayor of London: The
Tate Modern
is such a success story. You
have continually
found new ways of supporting
artists and reaching
new audiences.
JEFFREY BROWN: Afterward, I
talked to Nicholas
Serota, the man who helped
conceive Tate Modern
and has overseen it since it
opened in 2000.
NICHOLAS SEROTA, Director, Tate
Modern: I
think that maybe we helped to
open up the
idea of what a museum could be,
that the experience
of visiting a museum should be a
learning
experience. It should be a
personal aesthetic
experience ,but it should also
be a social
experience.
JEFFREY BROWN: A social
experience in a free
public space. Tate Modern
quickly made itself
a game-changer for contemporary
art in Britain
and beyond.
NICHOLAS SEROTA: It meant a
place where you
could literally hang out and
meet people and
have conversations and debates
and discussions
and seminars and listen to
lectures and genuinely
engage with the issues that
artists raise.
JEFFREY BROWN: Works by modern
masters, from
Picasso to Warhol, were part of
the draw.
But even more was the way the
repurposed power
station had been turned into
large inviting
gallery spaces, most of all the
35,000 square
foot Turbine Hall, the largest
gallery anyone
had ever seen.
It became the site of enormous
exhibitions
by leading international
artists, including
Anish Kapoor's Marsyas in 2002,
Olafur Eliasson's
Weather Project in 2004, Ai
Weiwei's Sunflowers
in 2010, and others that became
happenings
for locals and tourists alike. A
museum that
had expected to draw around two
million visitors
a year instead attracted more
than five.
Financial Times architecture
critic Edwin
Heathcote:
EDWIN HEATHCOTE, Financial
Times: Turbine
Hall is the best new public
space in an interior,
I think, possibly in the world.
We're used
to interiors now malls, huge
hotel lobbies,
airports. So, actually, here, we
have a space
of culture, a genuinely public
space, which
is an indoor plaza.
JACQUES HERZOG, Architect: We
hoped for that.
But we couldn't know, because
never before
a museum had such a space. And
sometimes it's
a small gap between something
great and something
that is a failure.
JEFFREY BROWN: The original
design was by
Swiss architects Jacques Herzog
and Pierre
de Meuron, then little-known,
now major figures
with buildings around the world.
And it was they who were given
the rare opportunity
to come back 16 years later to
finish the
job by creating a new wing, this
time facing
a problem partially of their own
making, for
Tate Modern, along with the
recreation of
Shakespeare's Globe Theater, had
helped transform
the Bankside area of London into
a bustling,
highly desirable neighborhood of
apartment
and office buildings.
How do you make a building that
stands out,
when there's so much around it
now?
JACQUES HERZOG: First, we had
glass, obvious
choice for a new museum, but
everything is
glass today, and especially in
the neighborhood.
So going back to brick, but make
this kind
of special lattice, which is the
perforated
brick walls, which brings light
in and out,
so it almost breathes, was a
good decision,
I think. So, it's closer to the
original building,
but nevertheless different.
JEFFREY BROWN: The result,
called the Switch
House, is a kind of twisted
pyramid, and its
effect is subtle, not showy.
JACQUES HERZOG: Sometimes, you
try to be bigger,
bigger, bigger and more, more
flashy and iconic.
You can't do this endlessly.
It's ridiculous.
And, sometimes, you have to
think of what
architecture can do for people,
which is not
being bigger, bigger, bigger,
but really for
the people and have a central
quality also
through its physicality.
JEFFREY BROWN: Inside are angled
walls and
galleries of concrete and wood,
offering curators
60 percent more exhibition space
for art of
all kinds, including video,
installations,
and live performance.
On opening day, this group
recreated famous
works of art, here Matisse's
Dance.
Tate Modern director Frances
Morris says past
gaps will be addressed, one in
particular.
FRANCES MORRIS, Tate Modern: The
lack of attention
to the great work made across
the world by
women now. They're poorly
represented in the
marketplace. They're poorly
represented in
exhibition program at
institutions in the
U.K. and the United States.
So, we're trying to
short-circuit that by
creating a sense of visibility
and, frankly,
celebration for some of those
great voices
in art.
JEFFREY BROWN: Another feature
of the new
building will no doubt make for
one of London's
best new public spaces, the 10th
floor, 360-degree
view of the city.
Early reviews in London's
famously critical
newspapers were good. Now the
public, many
marching over the Millennium
Bridge toward
the museum, will have its say.
From London, I'm Jeffrey Brown
for the "PBS
NewsHour."
GWEN IFILL: A news update before
we go.
The Senate failed to pass all
four gun control
plans brought to the floor
tonight. Votes
split largely along party lines.
And neither
the Democratic or Republican
measures adjusting
background checks and barring
sales of guns
to those on a terror watch list
could break
the 60-vote threshold needed to
pass.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Tune in later
tonight on "Charlie
Rose": Vice President Joe Biden
on America's
role in the world.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. I'm
Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all of us here at the "PBS
NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.